For a Hotel Beekeeper, Honey Is Just the Beginning
Photo

A wine distributor and sommelier by trade, Noel Patterson, the resident beekeeper at Miraval Resort & Spa in Tucson, parlayed his experience with terroir to capture time and place in a bottle. His latest medium? Honey.

In his role, Mr. Patterson harvests honey from hives on the property for spa treatments and for Miraval’s kitchens; educates guests on the role they play in bees’ ecosystems; teaches them how to set up their own backyard beehives; and, with tastings, helps them discover the unique flavors of honey.

He leads a workshop called “Honey: A Sensual Journey,” which teaches guests that, like wine, honey reflects the region where it’s produced. He also talks to guests about the bee population’s dire situation, and teaches them how to help contribute to their survival. (Properties like St. Ermin’s Hotel in London and the Mandarin Oriental in Paris and the W in Taipei also have on-site beekeeping.)

Following are edited excerpts from a conversation with Mr. Patterson.

How were you introduced to beekeeping?

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

I never intended to be a professional beekeeper, but for my birthday, my girlfriend at the time unexpectedly got me a beehive. She’s a talented organic farmer and built me a hive herself. I have a large property in downtown Tucson, and I grow as much of my own food as I can, but the one thing I was never able to produce myself was sweetener. I had my veggies and chicken, but not honey.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Beyond honey production, how do bees enhance our travel experience?

Beehives at hotels increase the overall bee population in the area and can play a major role in combating colony collapse. They play an integral role in the development of the food we eat and the natural habitats we explore. Now, more than ever, travelers are concerned with where their food comes from and make a conscious effort to eat organic, locally sourced foods. And bee pollination is key in growing healthy crops without the use of pesticides.