Women should receive more counseling before deciding to freeze their eggs: Study Video
Transcript for Women should receive more counseling before deciding to freeze their eggs: Study

Thousand to that "Gma" health alert for women trying to get pregnant. A new report shows more women are freezing their eggs but they may not be getting all the counseling and information they need about risks. Our chief medical associate Dr. Jennifer Ashton is here and seems like it would make sense. It is a multifactorial problem. When they go for egg freezing, the whole concept for something down the road maybe a year, maybe ten year, maybe more down the road so it's understandable if you just think right now in the present, you need to think long term because even if you're using a 25-year-old egg, if a 40-year-old woman is carrying that pregnancy we know that there are risks like preterm delivery, low birth weight. Pre-eclamps pre-eclampsia. Doesn't mean it's going to happen but you need to know about it and speaks to a larger issue here, robin. I think there is a massive crisis in health literacy in general and specifically in women's health literacy so we all need to do better in the medical profession and lay public and need to educate them as much as possible. Let's do it now and asked about the facts and asked viewers. We asked questions about ivf. The first one, ivf or egg freezing produces a baby 100% of the time. Our viewers said 6%, true. 94% false. Good. We have very well informed viewers and, of course, the correct answer is false, it doesn't. So it gives you better chances but it is not a guarantee and a lot of times in our celebrity culture we're seeing women in their 50s giving birth not realizing that many times they're using a donor egg and/or a surrogate so about managing those expectations. A couple more. Male factors contribute to infertility in 10% of cases. Our viewers said 50% -- 57% true, 43% false. That answer is false. Male factor infertility is at play 40% of the time. It's almost an even split. It takes two. I knew you'd get that in. One more insurance never covers ivf. Here's what our viewers said. Survey says, 32% true. 68% false. That's false. Sometimes it does and it's becoming more mainstream. More accessible. Much better cost options. Give us the top three in know your medical risk, manage expectations and ask about costs. There's a long list here but those are really the three top ones. All right. Jen, thanks so much.

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.