Aging Runners Find Help for a Question: How Slow Will I Get?
That schedule is on the website of Ray Fair, a professor in the economics department at Yale, who was inspired to find the patterns of slowdowns when his own running performance began to decline. The result is a table. You can put in your best time ever for an event, say a 10-kilometer race, and how old you were when you ran it. The table then shows how fast you could have run it when you were younger and how fast you should be able to run it now and as you grow even older.

“Some say the site changed their life,” Fair said. “They know they will slow down as they grow older, but as long as they slow down as much as the site says they will, they are fine.”

As for Fair, he’s not as happy.

“I am not on my line,” he said. “I am worse than I should be but I am trying to get back.”

But even being on the line means not being what you were before, and that can be a hard adjustment for many former elite runners.

“I still run every day,” Nippert said, “but it’s a tough transition to just being just an everyday runner.”

Sometimes, as with Mary Decker Slaney and Doriane Coleman, elite middle distance runners, the end of a career starts insidiously with an injury from which their aging bodies just cannot recover.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Slaney, who is 57, ruptured her posterior tibial tendon in 1997. She had surgery to have it reconstructed and then tried to train, telling herself she could get back to the point where she had been.

“For a long time, I thought there was still a way to get better,” Slaney said. “But eventually you get to a point where you realize that is not happening. I couldn’t run, I could only jog and to me that was disheartening. But after about 10 years, I decided: O.K. I will jog because I can’t do anything else.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

She was saved, she said, when she discovered a sort of combination of elliptical cross-trainer and bicycle that she can use on the roads outside her home in Eugene, Ore. “It is the closest thing to running without actually running,” she said. “I got on one for the first time and within 10 minutes I knew I had to have one. I thought, Oh my God, I haven’t felt that way in a long time.”

Slaney still dreams of running, and she often dreams she is back on the starting line. Her dreams even include training again. “There is nothing to replicate the feeling of running,” she said.

Her friend Coleman, a law professor at Duke University, understands all too well. For her, the career-ending injury was a ruptured Achilles’ tendon.

“For many years I didn’t have a successful strategy to transition from being a runner where every run is a training run, every run has a purpose and you are constantly aware of time passing and distance passing,” she said. “That’s so ingrained.”

She kept trying to train, she said, but “it was making me insane.” Then she reasoned with herself. “I am 55 years old, for God’s sake,” she said she realized. “I don’t need to go on training runs anymore.”

But old habits are hard to break. Sometimes, Coleman says, when she is on a run, feeling good, “my brain goes into its old track and I think, ‘I can still do it.’ ”

On those days, she says, “I pick up the pace a little bit; I kind of forget my age.”

But she also has a strategy that has changed her life. She leaves her watch behind. Before she sets out on a run, Coleman looks at the clock. When she gets back, she glances at it again.

Then she tells herself, “Ballpark.”