A Cliff-Edge Town Visited by Poets, Dolphins — and Octopuses
Before he brought his boat up on the beach under the curve of the old quay (it was new in 1834), Mr. Stones did one last cruise of the bay, and within minutes came across a small pod of bottlenose dolphins, not more than two football fields out. “This is the best place in the U.K. to see dolphins,” Mr. Stones said.

Moray Firth in Scotland might beg to differ, but New Quay is certainly one of the two best places, according to marine biologists.

“You never get tired of seeing them,” Mr. Stones said.

Moray Firth SCOTLAND North Sea N. IRELAND Irish Sea BRITAIN IRELAND New Quay ENGLAND WALES London Celtic Sea English Channel

There were three adults and two calves, one a newborn. He said the newborn seemed to still be learning how to swim properly, and it breached awkwardly.

Local watchers later said its mother may have been a famous cow who was first spotted as an adult 30 years ago, so is nearly 40 now but remarkably still procreating. Dolphins typically live only into their 20s in the wild, though some have been known to reach their 60s.

That cow actually has two names. One set of dolphin watchers here, the Marine Wildlife Center, call her Sue, and the other set, Seawatch, call her Ghost.

Yes, tiny New Quay, population 1,000 people and 200 to 300 dolphins, has two dolphin-tracking organizations, each of which keep separate lists of the animals.

New Quay is a photogenic place, even after most of the boats are pulled up for winter. From the Cnwcy Glap, or Chat Corner, a stone-built hangout on the cliff-top main street, it is easy to see what Dylan Thomas meant about the curved quay “shouldering out to sea.”

Photo

On the hill behind is what the poet referred to as a “hill of windows,” rows of stucco-fronted houses painted in bright colors. The poet never mentioned that bright palette; apparently, it’s a modern phenomenon.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

He noted instead the “small, sea-spying windows” in his poem about the town, “Quite Early One Morning,” though there is one reference to a “pink washed pub that was waiting for Saturday night like an over jolly girl waits for sailors.”

In Thomas’s time here, only 1944-45, it was a fishing village, a place for sea captains to retire “sober as Sunday.” Now the pubs greatly outnumber the churches, probably because of the new tourist trade, though there were plenty in the poet’s day. A famous alcoholic, he was a regular at a couple.

Photo

Winston Evans, 78, remembers when the fishing was so good that he had to go out only five days a week to make a living. Then prices rose in the 70s, “and we all bought bigger boats, so we had to go out seven days a week to pay for them.” Then prices fell, and restrictions on catches came in, and times were hard again.

Then, as he recalled, in the 90s, a local conservationist, Alan Bryant, “discovered” the dolphins. “We didn’t even know they were dolphins, we used to call them tumblers,” Mr. Evans said. “He showed us these were bottleneck dolphins and that started the ball rolling.”

Mr. Evans soon bought three dolphin-sighting boats. “Dolphins, it’s the best thing that’s happened to New Quay,” Mr. Evans said.

There are three dolphin-spotting tour companies in town these days. “They should rename it Dolphinville,” Mr. Stones said.

The dolphins brought the tourists. Then came the paint jobs, to prettify the old cottages. Next were the weekend homeowners up from London. They own a big chunk of the housing now — some rowhouses are said to go for a million pounds — sending some local young house hunters off to the trailer parks that surround the town.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The octopuses were not the year’s first surprise visit. In early October crowds of Portuguese man-of-war washed up on the shores of Cardigan Bay, where New Quay sits. In May came beachfuls of giant barrel jellyfish. Some of them weighed 50 pounds each, and the New Quay sands were carpeted with them. Talk about end of days.

An expert in cephalopods at Swansea University, Ed Pope, attributed the octopus climb-out to senescence — the rapid aging and quick onset of death. “What it shows is that we don’t understand their biology.” Complex and intelligent — octopuses have as many neurons as dogs — the animals nonetheless have a very short life span, often just a year or two, and they die soon after breeding.

Photo

More worrying is the gradual though slow decline in dolphin numbers in the area. Peter Evans (no relation to Winston Evans), a marine biologist and director at Seawatch, the dolphin-watching group, said one theory being studied was whether all the dolphin watching was gradually chasing the dolphins away.

Mr. Stones acknowledged the possibility that one day Dolphinville might have no dolphins, but said that would not be the end of the world. “We’ll still have 22 species of sea birds,” he said.

Mr. Evans, the fisherman, is hedging his bets. He had sold his fishing boat when he started his dolphin-watching business, but the buyer had bad luck and one night went down to the pub and impulsively put the boat up for sale. Mr. Evans snapped it back up, and is out fishing again.

“It’s a strange old world, isn’t it?” he said.

Or as Dylan Thomas put it, in “Under Milk Wood,” which is putatively based on New Quay characters: “Oh, isn’t life a terrible thing, thank God?”