More evidence that the dinosaurs were super unlucky with regards to that whole asteroid thing
An asteroid hit the Earth at the wrong time for dinosaurs, but the right time for us.

66 million years ago, an asteroid about 6 miles wide flamed across the sky and slammed into a sloping continental shelf, just off what is now Mexico’s Yucatan Peninsula. It collided with the force of 10 billion nuclear bombs and dug deep into the Earth’s crust, rippling through thick layers of stone and sand like a pebble slamming the surface of a lake, casting material from what was once solid ground high into the sky above.

Some of that material put a haze over the sun, chilling the planet and making plants and food scarce. That set into motion a chain of events that would kill all non-avian dinosaurs (we still have birds) and 75 percent of the species alive on Earth at the time. But it also paved the evolutionary way for the rise of mammals, humans included.

It was an extraordinary, planet-changing event. But just how unlucky did the dinosaurs have to be to end up wiped off the planet by some random rock from space?

Estimates put the likelihood of an asteroid the size of the Chicxulub impact crater hitting the Earth at about one in every 50 million to 100 million years. Given that the dinosaurs were around for about 175 million years, that means it was pretty likely that somewhere between one and three of those asteroids would have hit. But this one in particular caused a massive amount of destruction, and researchers think it’s because of where it hit.

In a paper published this week in Scientific Reports, Kunio Kaiho and colleagues say that only 13 percent of the Earth's surface had the right composition to instigate a mass extinction.

Last year, in an article also published in *Scientific Reports8, Kaiho et al proposed that soot from obliterated oil reserves in the sediments near the target site was the primary cause of the drastic climate changes that occurred in the aftermath of the impact.

“The ratio of soot components at the Cretaceous/Paleogene (K/Pg) boundary marked by a mass extinction caused by an asteroid impact indicates a higher energy than forest fires, and the equivalence of molecular ratios at proximal and distal sites indicate a single source of the soot, which suggest that it was sourced from the target rocks of the Chicxulub asteroid impact,” Kaiho says in an e-mail.

But not everyone agrees. Geophysicist Sean Gulick also studies the Chicxulub impact crater, and is the co-lead of an expedition that last year drilled into the center of the massive dent.

“I agree with the concept that location matters when you think of an asteroid strike,” Gulick says. “It's hard to create a global level extinction event without it being related to the climate.”

But Gulick hasn’t found evidence of hydrocarbon deposits in drill sites near the crater, and disagrees that soot alone could cause the devastation. “I fall on the side that it's not a singular thing. There’s a huge range of possibilities that we’re testing and I don’t think it was a single punch.”

What the team led by Gulick and Joanna Morgan, a geoscientist at Imperial College London, has found are rocks that were formed in ocean environments—carbon-rich limestones, gypsum, and other layers of rock created by evaporating ocean water. Gulick and others believe that the asteroid impact, when it hit these stones, sent carbon dioxide and sulfur high into the atmosphere. A recent study found that based on evidence from the crater, cooling from the sulfur was probably very dramatic, and persisted for a while.