Why do we go Black Friday shopping?
There are two kinds of people on Black Friday: the ones who stand in line, and the ones who think those other people are wacky. If you’re the latter, you may even spend your Friday morning watching news footage of the mayhem and rolling your eyes. But don't be so quick to look down on the line-standers of the world.

“The thing about Black Friday that people misunderstand is that people shop for a lot of different reasons,” says Kit Yarrow, a consumer psychologist at Golden Gate University and a consultant for exactly the kind of stores people wait in line for. She explains that we tend to assume everyone is just hungry for a bargain, because that’s the common denominator on Black Friday. But in talking to consumers who willingly wait in those lines, she’s found that they’re usually not in it for the sales.

“People shop because that’s what they’ve always done,” she says. “There’s a huge element of tradition. Some people have truly done this every year since they were kids.” Just like the folks who wait outside to get new Nikes or the latest Apple product, no one is forcing them to stand in line at 5 a.m. They want to be there. And for plenty, shopping isn’t so much the end goal as it is a means of getting along with their families.

“A lot of people are put together with people who they wouldn’t normally socialize with,” Yarrow says. “Sometimes going shopping is the only thing that everyone can agree on. It’s something everyone can do.” It’s the same reason that movies are huge on Black Friday. People do the same basic things each year because they’re activities the whole family can get behind. “There’s kind of a family ritual,” she says. “There’s this festive campout spirit of camaraderie that dissolves after the last Xbox is grabbed.”

As for the rest of us? Those who poke fun at the early birds may actually end up in a worse position at the end of the day. Because lots of us will wind up at the mall eventually. The morning crowd is there for the community, for the tradition, and lots of them are enjoying themselves. They’ve come prepared with lists and a game plan, and they’re less likely to be fazed by the crowds. It’s going to be a lot harder for the people who actually just want to be thrifty.

“If you don’t enjoy the vivacity of a mall, you’re definitely more vulnerable to all the sales,” says Yarrow. The stress of the crowds and the BOGO signs and the impending realization that you have no idea what to get your dad for Christmas—it all adds up. Suddenly you’re buying a sweater that you’re not even sure he’ll like because it’s 60 percent off, and it gets your total over $200 (so you get a free scarf with your purchase, which suddenly seems incredibly important).

These deals are designed to hit us where we’re vulnerable. Retailers know that if they throw the word “free” out there, consumers will lap it right up. Buy one get one free, get a free gift, free shipping if you spend this much money.As soon as we see that word we’re in. And people will spend a lot to get something for free. That’s why pretty much every store will offer some kind of free thing on Black Friday, explains Yarrow. It just works. “People will spend another $50 just to get free shipping,” she says. “Or people are buying an extra lipstick they don’t want just to get some gift they don’t really want.”