How to Cover Rocket Blastoffs With an iPhone
Mr. Bezos’ rocket company, Blue Origin, has a similar approach toward reusable rockets. Blue Origin has not yet finished its New Glenn rocket, which will take payloads to orbit, but it has been testing and launching a smaller vehicle, known as New Shepard, that will take space tourists on a short up-and-down ride to the edge of space.

Photo

Do you have a favorite space app or a piece of technology for covering space?

I don’t use any space-specific apps. But the interconnectedness of everything today is awesome.

Early one morning a few years ago, I interviewed astronauts on the International Space Station while sitting at my kitchen counter. Just oldfangled technology: a landline telephone. But it’s something that I wouldn’t have imagined possible 20 years ago. It’s easier than ever to connect Point A to Point B even when Point B is 250 miles up, speeding at 17,000 miles per hour.

Rocket launches are routinely webstreamed now. And I can watch a launch on my phone while going to pick up my family at the airport, as I did this month when the latest cargo rocket, an Orbital ATK Antares rocket, headed to the space station. SpaceX has gotten really good at showing video from its rockets, even the boosters descending back to Earth.

That all makes it easier to cover space without going anywhere. The downside is not being at launches. Space shuttle launches were Earth-rattling.

Back on Earth, how do keep on top of the space industry? Are there publications or websites that you routinely turn to?

Jeff Foust at SpaceNews somehow manages to do four things simultaneously (tweet, respond to tweets, file his story, ask questions). When Elon Musk did a Reddit A.M.A. (“Ask Me Anything”), instead of wading through the A.M.A., I took a glance at Jeff’s Twitter feed to see if there were any big revelations. There weren’t.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Emily Lakdawalla at the Planetary Society presents wonderfully insightful dives into the latest data from NASA’s planetary probes. Eric Berger, a former Houston Chronicle space reporter, has been freed from the chains of shrinking newspapers and is now at the Ars Technica website. He has his ear to the ground for D.C. whisperings of space policy, and he has great yarns, too. Among the many other reporters worth mentioning: William Harwood, Robert Pearlman, Miriam Kramer, Loren Grush, Lee Billings, Nadia Drake and Marcia Smith.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story How Do You Use Tech? Advice and tips on the technology changing how you live. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Two similar-sounding websites — spaceflightnow.com and nasaspaceflight.com — are ones I turn to often.

Outside work, what tech product are you currently obsessed with using in your daily life and why?

I guess I’m not obsessed with the iPhone X. I just returned it, even though I had gotten up at 2:45 a.m. to order it at the moment it went on sale and then received it a week later on the first day it was available.

Gorgeous phone. Gorgeous screen. Great camera. FaceID works really well (except when I was lying in bed). I found the new gestures easy to learn. It worked great. But with a case, it was wider than I liked. I decided I preferred the smaller iPhone SE. It wasn’t worth $1,000 for something I merely liked quite a bit.

Once upon a time, I used a microrecorder for capturing interviews and lectures. Then I used an iPod with a microphone attachment. Now it’s all on my phone.

What could be better about your iPhone?

Maybe Apple will cram the guts of the X into the body of the SE with an all-screen front. Here’s hoping.

However, the quick pace of change in tech makes it hard to maintain a functional work flow. It’s the curse of app rot. I’ve cycled through several voice memo apps. The one that Apple provides works fine, except it’s inconvenient to get the recordings off the phone.

I found a different app that worked well; then it didn’t work as well. I found another app I really liked. Then it started losing entire interviews, and that was unacceptable. I am currently using Just Press Record, which works across the Mac, iPhone and Apple Watch and stores the recordings in iCloud, so it’s easy to get at them wherever I am. I’m hoping the developer won’t lose interest in it anytime soon.