Prof. Dr. Peter Egger holds keynote speech at the seventh Barcelona Workshop on Regional and Urban Economics
Event

Prof. Dr. Peter Egger holds keynote speech at the seventh Barcelona Workshop on Regional and Urban Economics

23 November 2017 — 24 November 2017 European Regional Science Association

Location: Barcelona

Barcelona Venue: University of Barcelona

From the 23rd-24th of November the seventh Workshop on Regional and Urban Economics will take place at the University of Barcelona, Faculty of Economics and Business. For two days researchers in regional science and urban economics will concentrate their focus under the workshop theme “Causal Inference in Regional & Urban Economics – Methods and Applications”. The Congress is organized by the Regional Quantitative Analysis Group (AQR-IREA), which is located in the University’s Department of Econometrics, Statistics and Applied Economics. The group conducts research in the field of applied economics and focuses on urban and regional issues. Since 2013 the event has also been an official ERSA workshop.

The keynote lecture will be given by Peter Egger, Head of the Division Structural Change and Innovation at KOF Swiss Economic Institute, ETH Zürich. Prof. Egger will present “A Panel Data Approach for Spatial Selection Models”. His research focus is on applied and theoretical panel econometrics (time-invariant variables, long- and short-run estimates, spatial econometrics), applied and theoretical international and regional economics (outsourcing, multinational firms, trade volumes; economic integration, new economic geography), industrial organization and multinational firms.

After this ceremonial inauguration, the congress participants will work on numerous topics of actual relevance in three contributed sessions: Instrumental Variables, Regression Discontinuity Design and Difference-in-Difference. The contributed sessions open the stage for presenters from Heidelberg University, the University of New SouthWales, the London School of Economics and Political Science and of course the University of Barcelona, amongst others.

Attached files W2017_image mailchimp