A More Conciliatory Tone on Climate from the U.S. at Global Talks
Photo

Want the latest climate news in your inbox? You can sign up here to receive Climate Fwd:, our new email newsletter.

BONN, Germany — The senior American diplomat at the United Nations climate talks here told world leaders Thursday that the United States would remain engaged in global climate change negotiations even as it planned to exit the Paris agreement “at the earliest opportunity.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Climate Fwd: Sign up for our newsletter to get our latest stories about climate change — along with answers to your questions and tips on how to help. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Judith G. Garber, a State Department acting undersecretary, gave the first official American remarks to the United Nations climate body since President Trump announced in June that he would abandon the Paris deal. It was a far more conciliatory message than a presentation earlier in the week by White House officials promoting fossil fuels, which drew catcalls and a walkout.

“President Trump has made clear the U.S. position with respect to the Paris agreement,” Ms. Garber said. “Although he has indicated that the United States intends to withdraw at the earliest opportunity, we remain open to the possibility of rejoining at a later date under terms more favorable to the American people.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Ms. Garber’s address made no mention of coal while promising to help other countries “adapt to the impacts of climate change.” It was the only mention of climate change in the three-minute presentation, but that was one more than many Trump administration critics had expected. And in contrast to the noisy protests that greeted the White House fossil fuel event, Ms. Garber’s speech in a tightly-controlled plenary hall was met with polite applause.

Photo

The Trump administration has sent two sets of officials to the Bonn climate talks, where 195 nations are gathered to seek ways to strengthen the Paris agreement. White House officials, led by George David Banks, Mr. Trump’s international energy adviser, have been far more visible, talking to reporters and mingling with environmental activists as well as energy executives.