Should You Circumcise Your Baby Boy?
Some argue that circumcision can reduce the chance of contracting a sexually transmitted infection later in life. A systematic review of 26 studies found that circumcised men are at a lower risk of syphilis or chancroid. There might be some protection against herpes, but it’s less significant.

The strongest case for circumcision can be made as a benefit against the transmission of H.I.V. In Africa, where H.I.V. is much more prevalent, randomized controlled trials of circumcision have been performed. The results were quite convincing. Absolute rate reductions of 1-2 percent over one to two years were seen. Some estimate that for 10 to 20 males circumcised, one fewer man might contract H.I.V. over a lifetime. One study likened circumcision to a vaccine of high efficacy.

Again, though, these results apply to countries with a much higher prevalence of H.I.V. than we see in the United States. The protection afforded, therefore, is much less significant here.

Opponents of circumcision point to its potential downsides. Surgical complications, while rare, are greater than zero. Pain is a concern as well; evidence exists both to support and rebut the notion that infants recover quickly.

More prominent concerns focus on sexual function and satisfaction. Opponents argue that the foreskin, like much of the penis, contains many nerve endings. It also protects the head of the penis; without it, the penis might become less sensitive over time.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

But does this actually happen? A recent study in the Journal of Urology, discussed in The New York Times, measured penile sensitivity in circumcised and uncircumcised men and found no real difference. It wasn’t the first, or the best, study to look at this.

A randomized controlled trial of more than 2,700 men in Kenya found that after circumcision they experienced increased sensitivity, and that they had an easier time reaching orgasm. A systematic review and meta-analysis found that circumcision was unrelated to premature ejaculation, erectile dysfunction or difficulty achieving orgasm.

Over all, the evidence arguing for and against circumcision fails to make a compelling case in either direction. The benefits, while arguably real, are small; likewise the harms. In such cases, we usually leave the decision to the patient.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

There is, of course, an ethical problem here, since the choice is almost always made by parents, not by the boys themselves. Circumcision is irreversible, and many argue, quite stridently, that this is “genital mutilation” inflicted on children for no reason.

All cards on the table: I’m Jewish, and I’m circumcised, as are both my sons. The procedure has a spiritual weight in my community. When confronted by people who use terms like mutilation, I generally recoil. Circumcising my boys was a personal decision for my wife and me, and I understand the various arguments for and against. People angry about this choice seem to imagine that we haven’t thoroughly considered it.

I also live with the knowledge that it’s possible that my children might have chosen differently. But we also have to recognize that parents make many, many decisions for their children with a greater and more meaningful impact on them than circumcision. That’s what parents do. Assuming that this is the most consequential one we might have made about our boys’ lives, and focusing so much attention on it — when evidence makes the value of either choice unclear — seems out of proportion.

That doesn’t mean opponents don’t have a point. Circumcision is much rarer in most other industrialized countries. Health organizations in those countries don’t advocate the procedure as we do in the United States. An argument can also be made for waiting until boys are old enough to make a decision for themselves. A number of factors make that difficult, though. It’s a more complicated procedure then, with greater risks and higher costs.

Given that religion and culture are tied up in this, it’s clear that this issue won’t be decided soon. It’s also clear that evidence won’t make anyone’s choice easier. In the end, the decision as to whether parents opt to have their babies circumcised will remain a personal one.